Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Technology Manager for
Development Tools,
Godfrey DiGiorgi.
Good afternoon.
I hope you've all had a good lunch.
How was it this week?
Did we serve you good food?
Fantastic.
Continuing in our theme today of driving
into the details of development tools,
I would like to introduce
Anders Bertelrud,
the engineer on Project Builder
to do the build system.
Good afternoon.
So hopefully a lot of you in the 903
session saw some of the new features
in Project Builder and as well as
an introduction to Project Builder.
Something,
some of the topics covered were the build
system and how to set up your project.
So in this session we sort of assumed
that you have a project to build.
So this is really the
next step after that.
So you have a project that
you got to build and then,
you know, you got your sources fine.
And what do you do now?
Well, so one of the things we're
going to talk about is how to
streamline the build process,
speed up the builds,
how to take advantage of some of the
features Project Builder has for that.
Talk about polishing the product,
things like adding a version number,
things like that.
Building for deployment
as opposed to development.
For development you
often want to do testing.
For deployment you sort of
want a different situation.
You want to optimize,
you want to strip out debug symbols,
things like that.
We're going to talk about
packaging your product.
And as you know, on Mac,
we try for drag and
drop install experience.
You just take the app and just
drop it onto the -- into a folder
and not have to run an installer.
Sometimes you do.
We'll talk about that.
The third -- the last thing is ship it.
And that's up to you guys.
So we talk about the rest,
and then you deal with it.
What you learn in here in this
session is to use the IDE effectively,
in particular speeding
up GCC3 compilation,
which John talked about in the
session this morning on GCC3.1.
Talk about adding finishing touches,
building for deployment,
and also specifically disk
images and installer packages.
So to start off,
we'll talk about using the IDE.
So one of the things the IDE lets
you do is to customize your build
using what we call build styles.
So if you have a target
that builds a product,
you can set up multiple build styles
to build the product in different ways.
We'll get into that in a second.
Another thing you can do to
take advantage of that is to set
up a shared product directory.
And this does two primary things.
It lets one project access
another project's product.
So you can split up your development
if you have a large source base.
The other thing it does is keep your
binaries separate from source code.
So if you have your source on network,
you can keep your
binaries local for speed.
The IDE also has something
called executables.
And this lets you set up
different execution contexts.
So you may want to test your
app in four different ways
with four different test cases.
You may have a test tool that
takes different-- or you may
have a Unix tool that takes
different command line options.
You can set up different test
cases for each of those situations.
and quickly switch between them.
So build styles in-depth.
Where does a target kind
of define what you build?
A build style defines different
ways of building a target.
I'm sure you've all heard this before.
Many of you have heard this before.
But this really is kind of quite
powerful because instead of having
to copy the target to set it up to
build your app in different ways,
you just have one target,
you have many build styles,
any changes you make to the target,
you don't have to update multiple copies.
The build style just
dynamically overrides it.
So some examples of what you can use this
for is to turn debug symbols on or off,
to enable or disable assertions,
et cetera.
Actually,
in the 903 session on Wednesday,
there was a question about, well,
what if I want to build
deployment versus development,
and we have the object files.
Project Builder doesn't keep track
of the separate object files.
It actually turns out you can
set one of the build settings is
where Project Builder is stored,
the object files.
If you set that differently
in the different build styles,
Project Builder will actually write
the object files in different places.
So that's actually a way you can
work around Project Builder's
current lack of knowledge of that,
just by defining that build setting.
That build setting is objroot,
by the way.
So, build settings dynamically
modify the target settings.
And there are two ways they can do this.
You can either override a
target setting completely,
and then the setting in the
target will be completely ignored.
This is something that some
people run into currently
when they set up a project.
They'll configure a target,
they'll turn on a certain
optimization level in the target,
and then the build style will come
along and override it and say,
why isn't my optimization
level being used?
So, if your configuration in the
target is not being used,
check to see that a build
style isn't overriding it.
And we have some thoughts on how
to add UI to indicate that target
settings are being shadowed.
But the Jaguar version
does not do that yet.
So target settings can also refer
back to build style settings.
So this can be quite powerful,
because you can not
only override or add to,
actually, is the other way,
to add to a target setting,
but you can actually have a
target setting that includes $FU,
where FU is defined in the build style.
You just have to avoid
circular references,
right?
You can't define X in terms of itself.
That doesn't mean anything.
So when the build settings are evaluated,
there's a hierarchy.
There's a precedence ordering,
as you might expect.
And at the very bottom level,
you have access to all
the environment variables,
but anything you define
can override those.
But that can be useful for accessing
a build setting such as dollar home,
for example.
Next, we have the static settings.
These are the Project Builder defaults.
These are things like the
default optimization level.
These are things like where
Project Builder by default,
like the default extension for
an application package is .app,
for example.
Then come the target settings
that are in your actual target.
This is what you see
in the target editor.
That's the purple box right there.
And then the build style settings.
These are the things that go above that.
So again, reflecting that anything
defined in a build style will
shadow what's in the target.
And at the very top,
if you're building from PBX build,
anything you pass on the command line
in PBX build goes on top of that.
So that overrides anything.
This is just like in Make.
In fact, PBX build was the command line
interface that was designed
to be compatible with Make.
And in the IDE,
there's always one active build style.
And normally,
there's a pop-up in the toolbar.
And if you don't see that,
you can customize the toolbar
and drag the pop-up into it.
And you can choose the active
build style in that pop-up.
PBX Build, the tool,
allows you much greater flexibility.
You can, for example,
build without any build style,
or you can build with a particular name.
So much for build styles.
So the other thing you can do,
one other way you can take
advantage of the IDE is to set
up a shared product directory.
I mentioned this in the intro.
The reason you may want to do this
is that if you have a framework
built by one project and an
app built by another project,
if you set up a shared
framework directory,
then both those products will
get put into the same directory.
Project Builder has an extra
feature that lets it look in
that shared build directory.
So if you set up a
shared product directory,
it will look in there first when it goes
to link against a library or a framework.
So this is a very convenient way
of letting all of your target's
products go into the same place.
You can refer to them at build time.
The other reason, of course, is speed.
If you booted off NFS,
if you have your source code on NFS,
sorry, if your home directory is on NFS,
you may have your source code there.
You certainly don't want
to be shipping binaries.
You can set the build directory to a
place under your local hard disk and
speed up your builds quite significantly.
And the way to do this is to specify
a directory in the preference panel.
And the rule is, everything,
all generated binaries will be put there,
unless you do special
things in a build style,
override the special variables.
The other thing that happens is that
the runtime is set up automatically.
So when you run your app
from Project Builder,
not only will the build find it,
but at runtime,
the framework will be found as well.
So this is an added bonus there.
So we talked a little bit about
using the IDE effectively.
One of the other things I want to talk
about is speed up GCC3 compilation.
And you saw some of this,
for those of you who were in
the compiler talk this morning,
you saw actually screenshots
of how to configure this.
But the basic idea is to define
GCC as your default compiler,
and this is the default on Jaguar in
the prerelease seed that you have.
On the April tool CD,
because it's not a beta,
the GCC295 is the default compiler,
but the 3 compiler is there as well.
So you can say use GCC3, yes,
if you're older than on Jaguar.
If newer, then you don't have to do that.
What you need to do in order
to take advantage of this
is to define a prefix file.
So basically what we're doing here
is we're setting up a prefix file,
we're precompiling all
the stuff in it once,
and then every time after that,
GCC can reuse the information in that,
and thus saving a lot of time, right?
It doesn't have to read and
parse all your headers again.
So we need to define a prefix file,
include your common system
headers there that you're using,
maybe some pound defines,
and check a box that we'll see
that tells Project Builder to
precompile that prefix file.
And the third step in the current
seed is to set the use GCC3
PFE support setting to yes.
And you can do this in your target.
You can set both of these
in your target if you want.
You can set them in a
build style because,
remember, we're asking not to deploy
with GCC3 until we ship Jaguar.
So if you go ahead and
set this in a build style,
you can actually test,
just by changing the build style,
you can test your entire
project with 295 versus 3.
And we will be adding user
interface for configuring this.
So remember, GC3 is still pre-release
in the CDs that you have,
so I know you heard this before,
but don't ship anything
built with it until Jaguar.
So Project Builder also has some
features that are not as well known,
but they let you add finishing touches.
One of those is versioning.
You can add automatic version
numbers to your products,
like an application.
And we have built-in
support for something called
Apple Generic Versioning.
And this is what we use internally,
but you guys can use it as well.
And the way you do this,
this is all documented
in the release notes.
But the way you do this is to set
up the versioning system to be
Apple Generic and to set a couple
of special build settings that are,
if you go to the Help menu and
you go to the release notes,
there is optional integration with CVS.
There is a tool on the system called
AGV Tool that will let you automatically
bump the version number and check in the
project file with the updated changes,
et cetera.
Kind of handy.
Another thing that we don't
have direct support for but
that is easily accomplishable
is to run the GenStrings tool.
GenStrings is a tool that's
installed with the developer release,
and it regenerates your
localizable strings.
So if you make changes to
your localizable content,
you want to rerun this tool.
And you can actually set up
a legacy makefile target,
a legacy target to do this.
And instead of make,
you just have it invoke GenStrings,
or you have it invoke a script that
runs GenStrings on your project.
A third topic that I'm not going
to get into in great detail,
but it's also documented in
the developer documentation,
is scatter loading.
I just want to kind of point
it out so you're aware of it.
There are facilities to reorder the code,
the order in which the
code is in your executable,
in order to make it as efficient
as possible at runtime.
So the idea is that you put code with
related functionality together so that
you make use of VM pages in a good way.
Bye.
And Project Builder has some
support for this also in the docs.
And another thing that comes up
a lot is embedding of frameworks.
So if you ship an application,
you may not want to have-- and
you rely on some frameworks.
You may not want to have to install
those frameworks onto your system
because that can make things fragile.
So one reason is simpler packaging.
So the user buys your software,
inserts the CD,
and gets one app icon that
he can drag onto his desktop,
he or she, and doesn't have to install,
you know, 50 different frameworks
in 50 different places.
So the idea here is to take
the framework and actually put
it inside of the app wrapper.
The second--one second
benefit of this is,
of course, robustness,
that if the user moves the
application or copies it over to
a different volume or whatever,
the frameworks
automatically come with it,
and they don't have to
be handled separately.
So just a nice user experience.
Of course,
there are alternatives to this.
One is shared source code.
And the reason you may want and may not
want to do that is because then you have
to recompile the source code every time.
If you have 40 frameworks,
you make a change to
one of the frameworks,
you don't have to
recompile the other stuff.
You just work on it separately.
The other thing is that you
can group related functionality
together and increase code reuse.
It has to do with how you layer your app,
but often what you want to do is,
if you have plug-ins,
is to expose certain API,
and it's very convenient then to use
a framework to expose that API to have
your plug-in link against the framework,
and your app also links
against that framework.
And one other reason is
that if you do it this way,
you can separate out your products
into more logical components.
Of course,
frameworks also let you package
headers and resources and even
documentation in a much nicer
way than a static library does,
so that's really encouraged.
So how do we do this?
Well, to do this,
currently what you need to do is you
need to tell the application that
instead of looking for the framework
in a specific place in the file system,
you have to tell it to look
relative to the executable.
And the way this is done under the
covers is using a special path,
at executable under our path.
And you see the at executable
path dot dot frameworks there.
So the dot dot is to get out
of the Mac OS folder that's
part of an application package.
You don't really need to
know the details of that,
but this is the form the path will take.
And frameworks is then the
subfolder of your application
where the framework is put.
We also need to set
skip install equals yes.
And what that does is to prevent
Project Builder from actually trying to
install that onto your system because
you have now an installation path.
We are working on making this a
little bit easier to do and to
have this be set up automatically.
The second step after the framework is
set up is to set up the application.
So now we set up the framework so that
it knows how to tell the application
to look relative to the application.
Now we set up the application so
that it actually copies in the
framework after it's been built.
And to do that,
you use a copy files build phase.
It's a fairly generic build phase
that you can add to your target.
And in this case,
we're using it for a framework.
At this point,
I'd like to bring Christian Molick
up to help me with a demo.
So we have here a simple application
that I wrote this morning,
actually.
It's an app and a framework
in the same project.
And it's a very simple app that
just has a button that shows
the path of the framework.
So what we're doing first is we're
just going to build and run this
and just see what it does here.
Gratuitous use of metal.
Don't do this.
So here we just show the -- we
ask the -- we have code to ask
the framework for where it lives.
So in this case, it lives in our shared
products directory.
We set up a shared products
directory to volumes,
to WWC demos symbols, right?
So that's where all the products go.
So just go ahead and quit that.
And then what we're going to do now is
to set up the framework to prepare it
for being embedded into the application.
So let's go to the framework target.
and if we go into the target editor,
under the build settings,
we see it's set up not to install at all.
So what we want to do in this case,
though, is we want to install it,
but we want to put it inside of the app,
not in the system path.
So we're going to go to enter
executable_path/... to get us
out of the Mac OS subfolder,
and then into the frameworks subfolder,
which is inside of the app bundle.
And if we just do this,
Project Builder will try to create
this path in the file system.
So what we do is to scroll down
and to set a expert build setting.
Skip install equals yes.
And again, we're working on making
this a bit simpler.
So now we set--it's pretty simple still,
though.
Now we've set up the framework.
That's all we have to do.
Now the framework is set up to be
launched-- or to be found from the
application relative to the application.
But we also have to tell the
app to embed the framework.
So Christian's gone to
the app target here.
We add a copy file build phase.
Thank you.
we're gonna set this subfolder
to be the Frameworks folder.
And then we're just gonna find
under the Files and Groups tab,
there's a product for every
target that generates a product.
And they show up in red 'cause
we haven't built it yet,
so just gonna drag the framework in,
and that's it.
It's clipped here 'cause
the font's a bit big,
but, um, that's it.
So now we need to make sure
that the application indeed
depends on the framework.
It already did,
because that's how the app was set up.
And we can go ahead and build again.
And this time,
the framework's built separately,
the application's built separately,
and then the application copies
the framework into itself.
So now we see that the
products have been built,
and we can actually-- we have a context
menu that has a Reveal in Finder item,
and we can actually use that to
take a look at this to see if the
framework actually got copied inside.
So we're gonna do that.
One moment.
There we go.
And we see, okay,
so let's open up the application
and show the package contents.
And we see that under frameworks,
the framework is actually copied now.
So now if we run this,
we can run it right here from the finder.
And we click the button this time.
We see that now it picked up
the framework from inside of
the application's contents
frameworks directory.
So nice way of embedding
frameworks inside applications.
Okay.
Thanks, Christian.
You can have the slide, please.
So at this point,
I'm going to ask Christian to come up and
continue with the next part of the preso.
Thanks, Anders.
So now that we've added
some finishing touches,
let's talk about building the product.
Now, development builds are a bit
different from deployment builds,
and I'd like to go through
a bunch of why that is.
We could go into a lot of detail.
I'll just be humming right through this.
First of all,
compile optimization and macros
are going to be very different.
Usually when you're developing,
you want to avoid optimization or
have minimal optimization so that
your debugging experience doesn't
get messed up and so that you can
see as much of your code as possible.
You may also be defining your code
such that there are macros that
define what actually gets built.
You may have extra debugging code,
or you may have extra code that gets
built only for your deployment product.
You want to make sure that this is dealt
with when you compile for deployment.
In addition, you want to pay attention to
symbol editing and stripping.
By default,
you're going to get a whole bunch
of symbols in your binaries,
and very often you don't need any of
these symbols or just not most of them.
So you want to be careful to trim down
the symbols in the binaries that you
deliver to the minimal possible level.
primarily this is for application
developers so that you don't actually
vend more functionality than you
intended to and get yourself into a trap.
But it's also a very important
performance point because all the
symbols actually enlarge the executable
and particularly for dynamic libraries,
all of the symbols are going to
be shifted around and loaded when
they may not even be necessary.
And of course stripping
is very important.
Having extra symbols,
debug symbols in the
binaries you ship is no good.
You want to make sure to
avoid non-deployment files.
There are a bunch of settings that
affect Project Builder builds.
Many of them can cause intermediate
files or stuff you just don't want
to appear in your deployment builds,
and you want to make sure that
none of that is actually getting
shipped out to customers.
You also want to be careful
of ownership and file modes.
We've got the power of Unix now in OS X,
and that means that there's a lot
of file ownership and mode settings
that you can give to files that will
make them unusable or unaccessible
in ways that aren't immediately
clear when you're first testing them.
So you want to be very careful
that you've got a standard set
of ownership and file modes
for your deployed products.
Finally, you want to pay attention to
your distribution folder layout.
Now, ideally, in the cases we're showing,
you've got a package and
an application inside it.
It's all very simple.
But for more complex products,
you may have a layout
with various resources,
alternatives of the application,
and you want to be very sure that
these get in the right folders
and are all making sense in the
final thing that gets shipped out.
So talking about these in some detail,
first of all, the compile optimization.
It's very important that it
can interfere with debugging.
So if you're getting very
strange results while debugging,
you're having trouble stepping around,
check your optimization settings
to see if you may have optimized
your code to a level where you
can't really debug it anymore.
Now, when you're deploying,
you want to make sure to
be using optimization,
because if you don't
compile with optimization,
your code could be very slow.
Currently, we're recommending for people
who are using GCC to use OS,
which optimizes for size.
The actual size of the binary is one
of the biggest variables in terms
of determining its performance.
If you can save a few pages,
even if the code is a
little less efficient,
you may actually have
much better performance.
Similarly, you can have your other macros
in here that define crash risk or
alternative algorithms or such.
So with editing exported symbols,
you're going to want to do that.
You're also going to want to
make sure that your symbols are
stripped from all your products,
and in particular where this
gets interesting is when
you have embedded products.
So what we're demonstrating
here is an application with
a framework inside of it.
We want to make sure that
that framework gets stripped.
This is an interesting point because the
semantics for doing this have actually
changed with Project Builder recently.
In the past what we did was we
assumed that during a build,
all the products that are being
built are just being built raw,
and so when embedding
actually takes place,
we have to search through
every embedded content,
look for any files that are binaries,
and make sure that they're stripped then.
Now the new model which
Project Builder is using is that
when you're building for deployment,
binaries are stripped right away,
as soon as they're produced.
So we don't need to actually
strip embedded content over again.
We've got a different set of
settings that apply to that.
So it's really important to pay attention
to this step and make sure that your
embedded content also gets stripped.
Non-deployment files,
there's a bunch of different kinds.
Intermediates are the most common
that can poke into products.
I'd like to highlight also
the development property list.
Project Builder writes a
PB development plist to keep track
of what's going on with the product.
The idea is to enhance the debugging
experience by allowing PB to
know where the product came from,
exactly what project produced it,
and so forth.
It's very important to avoid
having this plist in your deployed
products if you can avoid it.
And some procedures for doing this.
These are very basic,
but it's clear looking around there
that not all developers are doing this.
You definitely want to clean your
builds before you do deployment builds,
and you want to check your
build results all the time,
because there could be files which got
in that last build which you really
don't want to ship to customers.
I want to review standard file ownership
and permission settings that we're
recommending for Project Builder are
root and wheel for system content,
root and admin for non-system content.
Very basic.
You want to make sure that you
don't ship things that aren't
actually readable by your customers,
aren't executable by them,
and you want to make sure that files
that aren't meant to be written
can't be written so that you don't
end up with accidental destruction
of a product that you've shipped.
And finally, just to highlight the
distribution folder layout,
in general you may have a structure.
In particular,
distribution routes often have
a structure where the route
of the distribution route
represents the system route.
So if you've got something
installed in user local,
you'd have a user local
in your distribution route
with the content in there,
and that allows you to specify
exactly where in the installed
file system files need to go.
So how does this get done?
There's a few steps to it.
One is the build actions,
which we're calling out.
This is something of a deep subject.
I'm only going to touch
on a few bits of it.
But when you're building,
we're not always just
building from the IDE.
You can see we're building
and we're cleaning.
We can also install and do
a number of other things.
These are build actions.
Now, primarily what these controls,
they determine the default
values for build settings,
a whole range of settings.
In fact,
the entire build system is really doing
much more than processing settings.
All the paths that point out files
in a project are just settings.
And so how these default values
change can be very interesting.
At this time, it's the case that
with PBX build install,
you're actually going to get some
significantly different default
values for settings than you get
with a build, PBX build build,
or a build from the IDE,
and recommending that for
when you're deploying targets,
what you want to do is actually
build them as root from
PBX build with PBX build install,
because that will give you all
around your best deployment
set of default values.
It also determines the build process.
This is again a tricky bit because the
semantics in PBF changed here recently.
It used to be the case that the build
model was that a build would happen,
and then to get a deployment,
you would do an install of that build,
which would copy it to its installed
location and do post-processing:
stripping, setting the owner, the mode,
and so on.
This model is good for some cases,
but it tends to break down.
In particular,
we just noticed that the compile options
you're going to want to use are different
for deployment and development builds.
So in this case, for a deployment build,
you can build it and copy
it over to its location,
but because that build for deployment
isn't really built the same way that
you want your development builds built,
there's not really a whole lot of reason
to build it first and then copy it.
So what's happening now in
Project Builder by default with
Jaguar is that products will get
built for deployment directly
into their install locations and
will be immediately stripped,
have owner and mode set.
So the process has really changed here.
And it's worth calling out that the
Actions Clean and Install Source,
which are supported now,
are very special cases.
In particular,
they don't have build phases
like the other builds do,
or at least not yet.
So how do you do this?
It's with build styles for deployment.
Anders really described
this in most of its detail,
but build styles determine how
targets get built rather than
what a target is building.
And build style settings
override target settings.
So we could just see that.
I'd like to get Anders to show one.
If I could get the demo screen, please.
So every project that you make
with Project Builder comes with
a couple of default build styles.
We're going to take a look at
the default deployment style.
Now,
the first thing that we want to add is
the setting deployment post-processing,
yes.
This is a sort of master trigger.
It's going to cause the
products to be built directly
into their install locations.
It's going to cause the
ownership and mode to be set.
It'll cause the stripping
to be activated.
This is sort of a master switch
for all of these variables.
Now, currently,
this has a hold over here.
The copy phase strip is from the old
process where we could never count on
products having been stripped initially.
So every time we embedded a target,
we had to look for binaries
in there and strip it.
Now, this isn't a very efficient process,
and with the new model,
you can expect that all of the
targets you're building are going to
be stripped as soon as they're built.
So we can actually
delete this setting now.
You want to be careful.
If you are including binaries that
are built from other projects,
you may need that setting when
you're building your target.
But if you're just using
Project Builder now,
you should have targets stripped
automatically as soon as they're built.
Additionally, we'd like to make sure that
the optimization is good,
so we're going to add optimization
in C flags set to -OS so
that we're optimizing for
size of the resulting binary.
And that's really all it takes.
That's a fully usable
deployment build setting.
Let's see if we can get
a test build with that.
And I'm not going to
go ahead and run this.
You won't see much of a difference in
this application because it's so simple.
But it is interesting that
you can see it was going and
recompiling all the sources there.
Thanks, Anders.
If I could go back to slides.
So there's building your
product for deployment.
But now that you've got that,
you've got to get it out to customers.
So let's see creating disk
images and Installer packages.
Packaging for distribution
is a large area.
There's a bunch of third-party
tools that are available.
And we strongly encourage anyone
who's shipping a product to think
about what's out there and their
install process and how to make
it most accessible for customers.
Primarily what we're
recommending is disk images.
Why?
Primarily, they're compact and
they're very accessible.
With a disk image,
you can take a very complex
product that may be using resource
forks and other HFS+ technology,
and you can put it all in a single file,
and it'll be represented
accurately there.
It'll also be compressed
very efficiently.
They're also very accessible.
There's no need to get Installer
technology or a new version of disk copy
because all this is built into Mac OS X.
You just double-click on a disk image
and it gets mounted and you can see it.
Another big plus of disk
images is that they can do
simple installation processing.
Currently,
a lot of people who are shipping
code need to have their users agree
to a software license agreement.
With the disk images,
you can have the software license
agreement displayed and force
them to agree to it before the
disk image will actually be
mounted and available to them.
Additionally, coming up in Jaguar,
for the full release of Jaguar,
there's a bunch of other simple
installation processing that will
be possible with disk images,
such as removing the disk
image after it's been used to
actually install the product,
to run the installer on a package
that's inside the disk image,
and a variety of other things like that.
I just mentioned Installer packages.
There are some good reasons to use those,
but it's mostly if you
have special cases,
in particular if you've
got scattered files,
files that need to get in particular
parts of the file system in order for
your application to work properly.
It's really a pain to give
users all those to drag around,
and you can't rely on
them to get it right,
so the Installer packages will let
you get scattered files all over the
file system where they need to be.
And also, if you need to do various
open-ended installation processing,
either prep the file system before you
lay your application down or do something
with it to make sure it's ready to run,
Installer packages have the most
open-ended support for that.
And I'd like to note here that you
can do installation processing with
both disk images and the packages.
And so it's careful to think
about what you're doing and why.
It can happen that if you've got
a software license agreement,
you may accidentally cause
the user to agree to it twice,
which can be a negative experience.
So you should try to choose which
ones you need and either put
your post-processing on the disk
image or in the Installer package
or wherever it goes if it's not
particularly visible to the user.
So how are these things made?
It's not entirely straightforward,
but there are a few
commands that get it done.
First of all,
the disk images are created with HDIutil.
This will actually make a
file which represents a disk,
an actual device.
Then you have to make a file
system on that disk image in
order to store stuff there.
And there are some variables for that.
We can decide how big the
file system is initially,
what kind of compression we have on it,
its organization.
Once we've got a disk image
with a file system on it,
we mount it with HDID,
very similar as to what's
happening when you double-click
on a disk image from the Finder.
You can populate it using any commands.
This is a big advantage, too,
because there are a lot of
different commands for copying.
Depending on how you have
your build process set up,
you may have a clear and easy choice.
You may want to use an
archiving copy command.
You may want to use Ditto,
which is a maximally preserving
directory-to-directory
copy that's on the system.
Our example will be using CP,
because it's very simple and accessible.
Then finally, when you're all finished,
you're going to want to call hdiutil
again to get some compression on that
image so that it's nice and tight.
: And again,
I'd like to -- it's going to be
automated in a number of ways.
In general,
your best bet is going to be using an
alternate target because we can plug
that into the dependents for the other
targets in the project however we want.
Another option is to use a script
phase so that every time a target is
built during that section of the build,
the packaging will take place.
We're going to be demonstrating
an alternate target.
Get --
Demo screen.
Thanks.
So we defined a deployment
build style last time.
Now what we're going to do
is set up the packaging.
We're going to need a script to do this.
So we're going to make a new file in this
project and not add it to any targets.
And we have one created
in the background.
Anders is going to type
this up magically for you.
First up, we're going to actually define
some variables that define what
the image name is going to be and
what its full location will be.
Now we remove any previous
image that might be in place.
You can't create a disk image
on top of another image,
so this is an important step.
HDIUtil is used to
create the image itself.
Here we're giving it an initial size,
which isn't very important.
The disk will actually
contain what is put in it,
so you're not creating a
maximum size for the image here.
Or you're creating a maximum size,
but not the true size of the image.
Here we're getting the device of that
so that we can then go and create a
file system on it using a Nufis call.
This will actually build an HFS+
file system on the disk image.
Now we eject it, that unmounts it,
so what we have is a file
all contained by itself,
which represents a disk with
an HFS+ file system on it.
Now we go and mount that writably,
much like the Finder would
do as if we'd clicked it.
Wait for four seconds just
to make sure it gets mounted.
And now we can copy our product onto it.
This is a simple CPRP that we're doing.
This should preserve just enough that
the framework inside there lives.
And now we eject it again.
That'll unmount the copy.
And now that it's all finished,
we're going to copy it aside
and do compression on it.
And that's it.
So saving that, to get it active,
what we're going to do is
make a legacy Makefile target.
But instead of calling Make,
we're going to actually
just call the shell script.
We're going to give it a name.
Because we're using the product
name as the disk image name,
we need to give it a name that's a
reasonable name for the distribution.
And as an argument,
we're going to give the name of the file.
So there it's set up.
Now what we need to do is make sure
that the target is properly placed.
The first target in the list is the
one that's going to be built when
we build the project from PBX build
externally from the command line.
So we're going to make that the
first target so that if this
is built from the command line,
what we're going to do is we're going
to get the fully packaged application.
To make sure that happens,
we're going to actually have to
drag the application target up to
the product image target to make
sure that gets built so that we
have something to put in the image.
Now if we make that target
active and go and build it,
we're also going to want to make the
deployments build style active as well.
Note that.
This should give us a full-blown
deployment build of our demo app.
So now it's built the app.
It's creating the disk image now.
The file system is copying and
the compression goes very fast.
So now if we can go and look at the build
directory where that will have shown up.
So you can see it popping
up on the desktop there.
And there's the application,
which can in fact be run directly
from that compressed image.
So now you can see that the framework
that we're getting is in fact the
framework from the application
inside the compressed image.
And of course to install it,
all you have to do is drag that
application to wherever it belongs.
Great.
Thanks Anders.
[Transcript missing]
I wanted to leave a little
time for Q&A here for PB,
but to recap some of the things
we talked about in this session,
we've seen some ways in which we
can streamline the build process.
You can set up a PFE file
to make GCC3 build faster.
You can use build styles in
order to customize the build,
both in terms of what gets built,
where it gets built.
You can try out new algorithms,
things like that.
You can set up execution contexts to pass
different parameters to your program.
You can, even if you have a plug-in that
could be loaded that conforms to
some standard plug-in API that could
be loaded by three different apps,
you could set up three
different execution contexts,
one for each app,
and test your plug-in with that.
So it's fairly flexible.
We've seen some ways of
polishing the product.
You can add versioning to it.
You can embed frameworks
inside of applications,
and this is something we encourage you
to do if your app is one that lends
itself to drag-and-drop installation.
This is really something we encourage
because users often don't want
to have to deal with installers
and having to figure out where
all the different files get placed.
If you have a single app
that can be drag-and-dropped
into the applications folder,
that's a very useful thing.
We have seen a little bit
about how you can build for
deployment and take advantage of,
especially taking advantage
of build styles for that.
talked a little bit about
packaging the product.
In this example,
we used the command line tool
for creating a disk image.
You can, of course,
also do that using disk copy itself,
but that's a manual process.
And so you can fit this into like a
nightly build that produces a disk
image in the morning that's ready
for--that has the latest build of
your product ready for installation.
And so now we've talked
about some of these things,
and so hopefully this
will help you to ship it.
So again, keeping in mind not to use
GCC3 until we ship Jaguar.
So what I'd like to do now
is to ask Advoji Georgi,
the technology manager
for developer tools,
to come back on stage and help
us with the roadmap and the Q&A.
Thanks.
Thank you, Anders and Christian.
Great stuff.
More information.
You've seen these slides many
times during the conference before.
The Apple Developer Connection
Tools page for extended information
about all the tools available.
The specific Project Builder page.
And the Apple Connection Downloads for
where you can get updated versions as we
release the tools on a quarterly cycle.
We also have the bug reporting
page listed because we do
want to hear your bugs.
We do want to see your experiences
with Project Builder and all the
tools so that we can address them.
Roadmap, we're getting close to the end.
The session immediately following
this one is the feedback forum
for development tools in room J1.
And then the final session of the week,
debugging in Mac OS X back
here in this hall.
And with that,
if I can ask the Q&A team to
start coming up to the stage.
Contacts for tools,
contacts for Project Builder.
I'm always available to talk
to you about opportunities and
issues with Project Builder,
how it will affect your development.
We have the mailing lists,
lists at apple.com, where we have mailing
lists for Project Builder,
Carbon development, et cetera.
Project Builder users is the one that's
specific to the Project Builder use.
And, of course,
the development tools engineering
feedback mailing address.
I hope you've copied that
down now through the many
sessions I've showed it to you.
That talks to the internal people
at Apple in charge of the team.